1. Samson Captured by the Philistines (1619)
Guercino (Giovanni Francesco Barbieri) 

According to the Bible, Samson, whose strength came from his hair, 
was shorn by his duplicitous lover, Delilah, and then set upon by the 
Philistines, who bound and blinded him. The focus of this dramatic and 
marvelously staged composition—a landmark in the artist’s career—is the 
vigorously modeled back of Samson, struggling to free himself. It is one 
of several commissions from Cardinal Giacomo Serra, the papal legate to 
Ferrara. Serra was a notable collector in Rome and also promoted Rubens.

2. Interior with a Young Couple (ca. 1665)
Pieter de Hooch

De Hooch was particularly skilled at interior scenes that capture the fall 
of light into rooms constructed from elaborately interlocking rectangular 
forms. These spaces provide the backdrop for a glimpse into the private lives 
of prosperous families. Here we see a young couple sharing an intimate moment 
in their bedroom; the woman gazes into a mirror on the wall, while the man plays 
with their dog.

3. Tobias Curing His Father's Blindness (1630)
Bernardo Strozzi

The subject of the painting is drawn from the apocryphal Book of Tobit, which tells 
how the archangel Raphael directed Tobias to cure his father’s blindness with the 
gall of the fish he had caught. Although born in Genoa, in 1630 Bernardo Strozzi moved 
to Venice, where this canvas was painted. He repeated the composition at least twice, 
suggesting that it enjoyed some success. Strozzi’s work is characterized by a distinctive 
vibrant brushwork and an attention to still-life details.

4. The Disillusioned Medea (ca. 1640)
Paulus Bor

In ancient myth, the sorceress Medea fell in love with the hero Jason and helped 
him to steal the fleece of a golden ram from her father. After having two sons 
with her, Jason abandoned Medea, driving her to murder their children as well as 
his new bride. Bor shows Medea before this dreadful act, slumped in melancholy. 
The artist devoted careful antiquarian attention to the backdrop of a pagan altar 
adorned with garlands, an ox skull, and a smoldering lamp, but his Medea resembles 
an ordinary young woman, prompting empathy and identification on the part of beholders.

5. Vanitas Still Life (1603)
Jacques de Gheyn II

De Gheyn was a wealthy amateur who is best known as a brilliant draftsman, but he 
also painted and engraved. This panel is generally considered to be the earliest 
known independent still-life painting of a vanitas subject, or symbolic depiction 
of human vanity. The skull, large bubble, cut flowers, and smoking urn refer to the 
brevity of life, while images floating in the bubble—such as a wheel of torture and a 
leper’s rattle—refer to human folly. The figures flanking the arch above are Democritus 
and Heraclitus, the laughing and weeping philosophers of ancient Greece.

6. The lacemaker (1656)
Nicolaes Maes 

Painted slightly after the artist’s Young Woman Peeling Apples, this scene reveals Maes’s 
increasing interest in anecdotal, domestic detail as he moved further out of Rembrandt’s shadow. 
Here, he shows a young mother absorbed in the meticulous work of lace-making, while her baby 
looks boldly out at the viewer from his high chair. As in many of Maes’s other works, the color 
red—on the mother’s bodice, baby’s hat, and tablecloth—provides a unifying element.



